initial pass (#51)
kwilteam/docs: docs/node/tutorial.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 2
sidebar_label: "Tutorial"
id: "node-tutorial"
title: "Tutorial: Creating and Joining a Network"
description: Create a Kwil network, and add another node as a validator
slug: /node/tutorial
---

In this tutorial, we will:
1. Create a node, and begin running a network with it
2. Create a second node, and configure it to be able to join the network
3. Add the second node to the network as a non-validating peer

> 4. Upgrade the second node to a validator

Reviewer: Grammar improvements

```bash
cp -f ./testnet/node0/abci/config/genesis.json ./testnet/node1/abci/config/genesis.json
```

## Adding The Second Node As A Non-Validating Peer

To add the second node as a non-validating peer, we need to connect to the first node. To do this, we will:
1. Get the first node's info, using the `kwil-cli` tool
2. Use the `kwild` tool to run the second node, connecting it to the first node

### Getting The First Node's Info

We can get the first node's info using the `kwil-cli` tool:

```bash
$ kwil-cli utils node-info --kwil-provider http://localhost:8080
Node ID: f29785e8f9c52635b55f6459b4b3a7330d3dee2e
Public Key: e307043e6bf79166c310c53bc589e653c10d9101469bde7e42bf515441dd8d8b
P2P Address: tcp://0.0.0.0:26656
```

### Running The Second Node

We can now run the second node, using the above information to specify the first node as a peer.
Since we are running both of these locally, we also specify new addresses for the different endpoints, so that the second node does not conflict with the first node:

Ensure that you replace the `--chain.p2p.persistent-peers` flag with node ID and p2p address from your first node, in the format `node-id@p2p-address`.

> Note that we convert the tcp address at `0.0.0.0` to `127.0.0.1`, since we are running the nodes locally.

Reviewer: Should it be: "We convert the p2p address...": because you call it P2P above?

> Note that we convert the tcp address at `0.0.0.0` to `127.0.0.1`, since we are running the nodes locally.

Author: Sure.  p2p address is sort've a name given to that specific address, while tcp is a protocol for communication.

```bash
kwild --root-dir=~/testnet/node1 --app.grpc-listen-addr=localhost:50052 \
--chain.p2p.persistent-peers=f29785e8f9c52635b55f6459b4b3a7330d3dee2e@127.0.0.1:26656 \
--app.http-listen-addr=localhost:8081 --app.admin-listen-addr=unix:///tmp/node1.sock \
--chain.rpc.listen-addr=tcp://127.0.0.1:26658 --chain.p2p.listen-addr=tcp://127.0.0.1:26655
```

If done correctly, you should see that the second node can now read the network logs, and has successfully joined as a peer.

## Upgrading The Second Node To A Validator

To upgrade the second node to a validator, we will:

> 1. Use the `kwil-admin` tool to request to join, from the second node

Reviewer: Maybe change to: "Request to upgrade" ? Beause technically the node has already joined the network and can read the logs.

2. Use the `kwil-admin` tool to approve the request, from the first node

We will use the configured UNIX socket to communicate with the nodes.

### Requesting To Join

> We can use the `kwil-admin` tool to request to join the network as a validator from the second node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use the `kwil-admin` tool to request to join the network as a validator from the second node, passing a `--rpcserver` flag to specify which node we are requesting from:
```

Add note on what the `--rpcserver` flag means?

```bash
kwil-admin validators join --rpcserver unix:///tmp/node1.sock
```

### Approving The Request

To approve the join request, we first need to get the public key of the second node. Note that we are using

> the http endpoint of the second node, since it is the public key that we need.

Reviewer: Why is http relevant here?

Author: Because kwil-cli now uses http.

```bash
$ kwil-cli utils node-info --kwil-provider http://localhost:8081
Node ID: 04b152ab7bb9d53aa6c3fa2838554a13f2b29be4
Public Key: f0ae28db2189c97eb5dfc6e42bef658197c05868cefa6a0565159e317373f7e2
P2P Address: tcp://127.0.0.1:26655
```

We can use the `kwil-admin` tool to approve the request from the first node, by specifying the public key of the second node.
We also specify the UNIX socket of the first node, so that the `kwil-admin` tool can communicate with it.

```bash
kwil-admin validators approve f0ae28db2189c97eb5dfc6e42bef658197c05868cefa6a0565159e317373f7e2 --rpcserver unix:///tmp/node0.sock
```

And that's it! The second node should now be a validator on the network.  To verify this, we can use the `kwil-admin` tool to get the list of validators:

```bash
$ kwil-admin validators list --rpcserver unix:///tmp/node0.sock
Current validator set:
  0. {pubkey = e307043e6bf79166c310c53bc589e653c10d9101469bde7e42bf515441dd8d8b, power = 1}
  1. {pubkey = f0ae28db2189c97eb5dfc6e42bef658197c05868cefa6a0565159e317373f7e2, power = 1}
```

## Conclusion

> In this tutorial, we have:
> 1. Created a node, and begun running a network with it
> 2. Created a second node, and configured it to be able to join the network
> 3. Added the second node to the network as a non-validating peer
> 4. Upgraded the second node to a validator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we have:
1. Created a node and started a network;
2. Created a second node and configured it to join the network;
3. Added the second node to the network as a non-validating peer;
4. Upgraded the second node to a validator;
```

    "best_block_time": "1969-12-31T18:00:00-06:00",
    "syncing": false
  },
  "validator": {
    "pubkey": "22cbbb666c26b2c1f42502df72c32de4d521138a1a2c96121d417a2f341a759c",
    "power": 1
  }
}
```

The `node.node_id` and `node.listen_addr` fields can be given to the second node as a persistent peer, in the format: `node-id@p2p-address`.
For the above node, we would have `b624b3395f22f8cb57cf86d58cbcd6b355d12e18@127.0.0.1:26656`.

## Creating A Second Peer Node

We will use the `kwil-admin` tool to create the second node's directories and configs. We can specify where it can find the genesis file,
as well as peers that it should try to connect to when starting up. 

```bash
kwil-admin setup init --output-dir ./testnet/node1 --genesis ./testnet/node0/genesis.json \
--peer b624b3395f22f8cb57cf86d58cbcd6b355d12e18@127.0.0.1:26656
```

To verify that the second node has been created correctly, we can start it up. Since we are running both of these locally, we need to specify
new addresses for the different endpoints, so that the second node does not conflict with the first node:

```bash
kwild --root-dir=./testnet/node1 --app.grpc-listen-addr=localhost:50052 \

> --chain.p2p.persistent-peers=f29785e8f9c52635b55f6459b4b3a7330d3dee2e@127.0.0.1:26656 \

Reviewer: Shouldnt this persistent peers address be the node id from the first node? the `b624b3395f22f8cb57cf86d58cbcd6b355d12e18@127.0.0.1:26656` peer address?

--app.http-listen-addr=localhost:8081 --app.admin-listen-addr=unix:///tmp/node1.sock \
--chain.rpc.listen-addr=tcp://127.0.0.1:26658 --chain.p2p.listen-addr=tcp://127.0.0.1:26655
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Notice that `--chain.p2p.persistent-peers` is set to the first node's id and IP address.

```

If done correctly, you should be able to see the second node's logs, and it should be able to read the network logs.

## Upgrading The Second Node To A Validator

To upgrade the second node to a validator, we will use the `kwil-admin` tool to:
1. Request to join the network as a validator, from the second node
2. Approve the request, from the first node

We will use the configured UNIX socket to communicate with the nodes.

### Requesting To Upgrade

To request to join from the second node:

```bash
kwil-admin validators join --rpcserver unix:///tmp/node1.sock
```

To check that the request was successful, we can get a list of pending join requests:

```bash
$ kwil-admin validators list-join-requests --rpcserver unix:///tmp/node0.sock
Pending join requests (1 approval needed):
  Candidate                                                       | Power | Approvals | Expiration Height
 a2d8e307117695c8d0d3adbda136cb2ad630c43b8672a0eba46d79501831b794 |     1 |     10000 | 15906
```

### Approving The Request

> We can vote to approve the join request from the first node. We specify the candidate's public key, which we can get from
> the list of pending join requests as shown above:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first node must vote to approve the second node's join request. Using the `kwil_admin` tool, the first node can vote to approve the second node by running the `kwil-admin validators approve` command and passing the second node's public key:
```

```bash
kwil-admin validators approve a2d8e307117695c8d0d3adbda136cb2ad630c43b8672a0eba46d79501831b794 \
--rpcserver unix:///tmp/node0.sock
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:::tip
If the requesting node's public key is unknown, all pending requests and their public keys can be retrieved with the `kwil-admin validators list-join-requests` command.

```

Author: Is it necessary to have this tip?  We do it directly above

Author: Like literally 10 lines above
